---
id: 2
title: The Big Picture of User Authentication
tags:
  - node
  - express
  - passport
  - mongodb
  - googleoauth
date: 2022-10-11
excerpt: This article will equip you with the bird's-eye view of how user authentication using Node.js, Express, Passport, MongoDB, and Google OAuth.
---

I always try to understand how things work before diving right into codes.
Because it helps me work more efficiently as well as effectively. Having a big
picture of your project is like holding a map in your hands on a journey.
Because the map saves you a lot of time by guiding you where you are and where
you should go, right?

It is not easy to develop user authentication with Node.js, Express, Passport,
Mongoose, and Google OAuth API at first glance. If it is your first time to
involve in user authentication, which is essential in a web service or
product, you may scratch your head for a while. My job in this article is to
uncover abstract concepts and flows of user authentication. I will use many
diagrams which are my favorite tools to visualize something in questions.

## User Authentication Flows

![User Authentication Flows](https://miro.medium.com/max/828/1*4MJ769RrhCTF0I6CJiHatA.png)

The diagram above describes the user authentication process flow. The original
diagram is from Stephen Grinder's Github and I modified a little bit from his.
Without further ado, let's begin.

### The additional explanation on the top of the diagram

#### 1. Handling the userâ€™s sign-in request.

When a user clicks a Sign-in, login, or sign-up button, your server sends a
request to Google and the request includes Client ID, Client Secret generated
from Google Cloud Platform as well as a redirect URI. The redirect URIs are
the endpoints to which the OAuth 2.0 server can send responses.

#### 2. Google handles permission.

When Google receives the request, it checks your credential and then asks the
user to give you permission. Once Google confirms that the user accepted to
give you permission, Google sends a special code through the redirect URI.
This special code is important. Because you can get the user data only in the
case when this special code is verified by Google. Google is out from our
scenario after passing over the user data to the server.

#### 3. The server works with the data sent from Google.

Now the server has the user's data on its own hands. What should the server do
with the data next? How does it ensure that the user has been authenticated
and allowed to use our service? This is the step where MongoDB(database) and
the cookie session comes into play. The server creates an instance of the user
in the database if her/his information does not exist. The user data saved in
MongoDB is going to be used to generate a cookie. In the scenario above, the
cookie is an encrypted string of user data. This cookie stays in the session
and it will be sent to the server when it sends a request to do other tasks
such as checkout and making an order.

## Passport makes the job easier

In the diagram above, the purple areas are the tasks handled by Passport. As
you can see from the diagram, Passport will save your time and sweat
concerning working with Google OAuth API and cookies. However, it is not easy
to understand how Passport works at first glance. There are some confusing and
abstract parts. I will briefly share my personal experience.

Passport uses what are called strategies to authenticate requests. Strategies
range from verifying a username and password, delegated authentication using
OAuth, or federated authentication using OpenID. Aside from Passport,
therefore, you need to download passport-google-oauth20 package from npm to
build authentification using Google. Of course, if you want to do it with
other platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, or Github, you need other packages
that are relevant to meet your needs. Also, you need the cookie-session or the
expression-session packages which are relevant to setting up a cookie.

It was not crystal clear when it comes to callbacks in Strategy. Also, I
struggled with understanding the done function and beneath the hood of the
serialize and deserialize functions. You can check the articles below which
gives you a picture regarding these questions.

## The relationship between Google OAuth2 API, Node.js, Express, Passport, MongoDB, and other packages

![The relationship of GoogleAPI, Node.js, Express, Passport, MongoDB and other packages](https://miro.medium.com/max/828/1*d1fJ29G6wsV2mxO7iSzmVg.png)

It is not enough to get the relationship between technologies and packages by
only seeing the first diagram. I drew the second diagram in order to help you
get a sense of how each technology interacts with another.

## The file structure

![File Structure](https://miro.medium.com/max/828/1*qW4pkdOdg3CbYHhjGtOVZQ.png)

You can find codes for the user authentication in the Github. Instead of
explaining every single line of codes, I will end up the article by
introducing you to how I structured files.

### Keys.js

The first directory, config, is the place where all private data reside in. Inside of keys.js I put Google Client ID, Google Client Secret, and mongo URI because they should not be exposed to the public and stay safe.

### User.js

Users.js in the models directory has codes to work with a schema and a model for User collection in MongoDB. If you don't know about those concepts you can watch videos that I personally recommend through the links below. It is another topic that I can write another page of a post.

### authRoutes.js

authRoutes.js handles requests sent from a user and this is the gateway to process the request.

### passport.js

passport.js in the services directory has codes regarding passport. Inside of this file, there are codes regarding the purple areas of the first diagram.

### index.js

index.js is like a center where express, passport, mongoose, and cookie session are interwoven together.

The file structure is just an example of mine. You can have totally different structure from mine depending on your style and at your convenience. So that's it for this article!

It was darn daunting when I first got around with Google OAuth2. Having no background in computer science, I needed to spend lots of hours to have a thorough understanding of how user authentication works.

Hope this article helps someone else who just feels lost in the middle of the project because of the user authentication. Happy coding!
